All right so here we have our second exercise for relative extrema.
It says find the relative extrema for f of x equals x cubed minus 27 x plus 102.
So go ahead and pause the video and give it a shot.
All right so let's do it together relative extrema.
That's what we're finding.
So the first thing always that we need to do is to find the derivative.
So let's go ahead and find that first derivative and let's get the derivative of each individual term.
And as you know we keep the sign in between.
So a derivative of this one.
Execute.
It's a power function.
So we bring down our dictator 3 X less powerful becomes a two minus constant moldable we have a 27.
So we leave it outside and derivative of X is we're bringing down a dictator which is 1 x 2 0.
And plus the derivative of this constant which is zero because one or two is just a number.
All right so let's simplify.
We have 3 x squared.
Mine is 27 times 1 times x 2 0.
And again this is one.
So it's 27 times 1 which is just 27.
And then the plus 0 we do not market because it doesn't do anything all right.
So we found the derivative of f of x.
Next step is to find the values that make the derivative either equal to zero or undefined.
But again in this example it cannot be undefined because there's no bottom and therefore we cannot have
a zero on the denominator because there is none.
So we're just going to find the numbers that make this equal to zero.
Three x squared minus 27 equals zero.
I want to show you something.
So in the video that will continue in just a second I explain that you have to solve for x by moving
this 27 to the other side dividing by 3 and then taking the square root of both sides.
However maybe you noticed this what happens if you factor out a three from this side.
So you put a 3 on the side.
And here you have X squared and minus.
So if you take out three from 27 27 over three is nine equals zero.
So maybe that's something that you notice that we could do.
Now what is this.
Remember this A-squared minus B squared.
That is a difference of squares.
Right.
And remember that difference of squares is equal to a plus b times a minus p.
Again this is difference of squares
right.
So the A in this case would be X and the B would be 3.
So this could be factored as 3 times x plus 3 times X minus 3.
You see that that's according to our rule for difference of squares and then you can look at this and
say OK this whole thing to be zero.
Either this one has to be zero or this one has to be zero.
And then you know you can just grab each term and say X plus three equals zero you move three to the
other side by subtracting right.
These cancel out x equals negative 3.
That's one of your answers.
So when you plug in negative three over here that's going to give you negative three plus three equals
zero or on the other hand if you have X minus three equals zero.
Which is this one here at 3 three and both sides
cancels out x equals positive 3.
All right.
And that makes sense because three minus 3 gives you zero.
In other words if you did the problem this way where you factor out the three and then you got this
difference of squares and then you factor.
That's great.
Or if you did it a different way and still got negative three and three then that's perfect as well.
Right.
It doesn't matter as long as you get the three and negative three.
I just show you the other way in the video to give you a different alternative because different of
squares we covered before but we hadn't covered getting square roots.
When you're solving for X..
All right so now let's go back to the original video.
So we only have one X here so maybe we can solve for it.
Let's give it a shot.
So let's move this 27 to the other side plus 27 and plus 27.
We bring down the 3 x squared negative 27 plus 27 cancels out and zero plus 27 is positive 27 right.
So we have this three multiplying the x squared.
So let's get rid of that 3 by dividing by three on both sides.
So we have three over three cancels out.
X squared equals nine.
OK.
So remember we don't want X squared we want x.
So what is the inverse of squaring something.
It has to be taking the root right.
And why is this.
Well think about it doesn't make sense why taking the square root is the opposite of squaring something.
For example if I tell you three squared that gives you nine but if you take the roots of that nine it
gives you three right.
So they're just opposites.
So this square root cancels out with this squared.
And we have X equals square root of nine which is three.
Now there is something about this that you need to know the answer is not only 3.
The answer is plus minus three.
What does that mean.
That means that both positive 3 and negative three are part of the answer.
We might have done our problem before where For simplicity's sake we just said that the square root
of nine was three.
But in reality the answer is going to be plus or minus three.
That means that you have two critical numbers positive three and negative three.
All right.
This is very important fact I'll put it over here.
Square root of for example 9 is plus or minus three square root of positive 16 is plus or minus 4.
Square root of 25 equals plus or minus 5 etc. etc..
All right.
And this happens every time you're doing for example a square root.
Now this is only true for even roots.
All right so even roots are 2 4 6 8 etc..
If you have an odd root something like for example the cube root of 27 then the answer is going to be
only three not plus or minus three because if you put it because a minus because negative three to the
third power is not 27 is negative 27.
That's the thing about odd roots.
They actually keep the sign of the original number.
In this case however even roots.
So this is a square root.
So that means he has a 2 but it could also have a 4 6 8 x cetera.
Let me cross out this odd route so this even route you have to account for both possibilities because
three squared is nine but negative three squared is also nine and so on and so forth.
So if you go down here and only put positive 3 Your answer is incomplete and you're going to get partial
points.
All right.
So even roots remember always give you plus minus answers.
So we have two critical numbers and what we'll do is we'll go to our third step
and we'll put our two critical numbers.
So that's negative 3 and 3.
So we have to test to the left of negative 3 between negative 3 and 3.
And to the right of 3.
So to the left of negative 3 loves to negative 10 it's typically an easy number between negative 3 and
3.
Let's do zero and to the right of 3.
Let's to also test.
All right so let's grab these three test values and plug them into the derivative so prime of negative
10.
So we have three times negative 10 squared
minus 27 negative 10 squared is 100 because negative times a negative equals a hundred times three is
three hundred minus 27 is to 73.
So that means that to the left of negative three we have a positive value for the derivative.
All right.
Let's test the zero prime of zero into the derivative.
So we have three times zero squared.
Mine is 27 so 0 squared is 0 times 3 just cancels out at zero and we have negative 27 as the answer.
So between negative 3 and 3 we have a negative derivative.
And finally let's test our last value which is 10.
Plug it into the derivative.
So we have three times 10 squared minus 27.
In fact that will give us the same answer as the negative 10 because we're squaring it.
So at the end of the day it doesn't matter if it's positive 10 or negative 10 10 squared is a hundred
times three is 300.
Minus 27 is to 73.
So the right of 3 we have a positive derivative.
There we go.
All right so what is the last step we need to classify our negative 3 and our 3 as either Max or mennes
or none.
Because sometimes if the sign doesn't change as you go from the left of the x value to the right of
the x value then it's neither a max or a min.
All right so let's go ahead and use our mnemonic.
I'll put it up here.
So remember we draw a max and a min
max and that's a min.
And let's draw a line to the left and right of each.
So that's one here and one here and one here and one here.
And for the max to the left of it we have a positive slope because it's going up and to the right.
We have a negative slope because it's going down.
And then for the men to the left of it we have a negative slope because it's going down and to the right
of it we have a positive slope because it's going up.
So again this mnemonic reminds you how the signs look for the left on the right of each type of extrema
for both Max and men's.
We're going to use these two to check out what the extremes are.
So negative 3 we have positive on the left and negative on the right.
So it looks like it's going to be a max right.
Positive on the left and negative on the right.
And then for three we have negative on the left and positive on the right.
So here we have negative on the left and positive on the right.
So it's a min.
So we have one Max and 1 min last thing we need to do is find the corresponding y values for each of
these critical numbers for this negative 3.
And for this three and remember to do that we plug them into the original function because we want the
y values for these two.
So let's go ahead and do that.
So we have f of negative 3.
So plug in entry into the original we have negative 3 cubed
minus 27 times negative 3 plus 102.
So mine is 27 which is negative 3 plus 1 0 2.
So that will give us negative 3 cubed is negative 3 times and negative 3 which is 9 times negative 3
again which is negative 27.
And when we do it down here actually negative 27 and then negative times a negative is a positive and
27 times 3 is 81
then plus one or two and again feel free to use a calculator for all of these it gives those 1:56.
All right so that's a y value for negative 3.
Let's find the y value for positive 3.
So that's three cubed.
Mine is 27 times three plus 102.
That gives us 27
minus.
This time it's negative times a positive.
So it stays a negative 27 times three.
We said it's 81 plus 102
which gives us 48.
So there we have her answer.
Let's put it up here.
So we said that for negative three we have a max write positive on the left negative on the right.
According to this so we have Max
at negative 3 comma 1 to 6.
That is a Y value for that point.
And we also have a men
which is the other one.
So three and we know Id say men because it's negative on the left and positive on the right.
Just like up here and it is located at x value is 3 and y value is 48.
And this is our relative extrema
right.
That is our answer right there.
All right.
So again the problem got a little bit long but it's the same concept.
You find the derivative find the numbers that make it equal to zero or undefined for each of these numbers.
You test left and right.
Plug it into the derivative.
Then you check the signs and you classify based on our mnemonic here where we draw a max and a min.
And we notice the signs to the left and right.
And finally you find the y values corresponds to those critical numbers which we got as 156 for negative
3 and 48 for three.
So Max at negative 3 you won 56 and men at 3 comma 48.
And again this is really important.
If you haven't even roots.
So the square root the fourth through the sixth root etc. and you get in the root of a number that's
going to be plus or minus the root.
Not only the plus because the minus could also work.
All right.
So don't forget about the even roots.
And don't forget about adding the plus and minus.
That's pretty much it.
I'll see you in the next tutorial.
And remember practice practice practice.